In previous units,
we talked about how Boolean functions
can be realized using logic gates.
And in this unit, we are going to talk
about how we can actually build and
implement the logic
gates using a formalism
called Hardware Description Language or
HDL.
Once you build a logic gate in HDL,
you can actually simulate it, test it.
And finally, build it in hardware
as we now turn to describe.
All right.
So let's begin this journey from
obstruction to implementation.
The first thing that you have to do as
a gate architect is demand a full and
complete description of
the desired gate's behavior.
And in this case, what we need
is some sort of a truth table.
In the case of Xor,
it's a very simple truth table.
And the truth table along with
a gate diagram, gives you everything
that you need in order to understand
what this chip is supposed to do.
And what we see here is also sometimes
called the chip's interface.
And indeed, using this information,
you can start writing an HDL file
that will look something
like this example here.
So we start the HDL program or
the HDL file with some documentation,
free-form, you know,
you can write whatever you want there,
which describes what
the gate is supposed to do.
And then we specify the name of the chip.
The names of the inputs of the chips and
the names of chip's output.
And all this information,
by the way, the name of the chip and
the names of its inputs and
outputs is typically given to you.
You know,
it's not something that you decide.
It's something which is part of
the chip's contract, if you will.
So you simply write it up using this
syntax and then you write the magic
word parts, which describes that
here begins the segment of your
program in which you're going to describe
how this chip is actually designed.
Now when you use such a chip,
such Xor chip,
what we've seen so
far is called a gate interface.
And notice that this is everything
that I need in order to use Xor gate.
However, if I have to build this gate,
well, that's a different story.
Now, I have to open up the black box and
actually design it.
So when we use chips,
we always wear two different hats.
There's the hat of the programmer
who uses the chip, the chip part and
for this,
all we need to know is the chip interface.
And there is the other
hat of the chips builder,
which is what we're going to do now.
So moving alone, let's discuss how we
actually build this chip from scratch.
All right.
So, actually we are not going to
build it from scratch, we can if we,
if we need if we need to we can
build it from a NAND gates only.
However, let us assume that we,
we've already built
an and gate an or gate and, and not gate.
Well, if we built these gates or
if someone gave us
these gates that we can freely use.
Here's what we can do.
We can inspect the truth table and
figure out from the truth
table that the Xor functionality
can be described as follows.
I mean, look at Xor,
look at the truth table.
The gate outputs one in two cases only.
If if a and not b or if b and not a.
That is if a is true and b is false or
if b is true and and a is false.
This sort of comes out,
jumps out from the truth table.
You can either see it on your own or
as Noam described in one of the previous
units, you can synthesize
this this insight or
this, Boolean function
from the table itself.
So, once you come up with this insight,
the next thing that you do is you
think about it for a little while and
you come up with a gate logic diagram
that describes how we can build this
Boolean function using basic logic gates
that we already have to our disposal.
Now developing such diagrams is a matter
of experience and the only way to,
to gain this expertise is to see many,
many examples like, like this one.
So let's take this example and
and explain it in in detail.
So the first thing that we can
do is draw the boundary of
the chip diagram or
the or the gate diagram.
So we use this dash to outline for
this purpose and
what remains outside the boundary
is the user's view of this gate.
In other word, the, the gate interface.
All the users knows is that he or
she has a gate that has two inputs,
a and b, an output called out and
altogether.
They somehow, this chip as if by magic,
delivers Xor functionality.
So we draw this diagram and
and this interface and
now we can delve more into
the into the inner architecture.
So notice how the a signal
is being copied and
sent simultaneously into
two different destinations.
One of them is the and gate and
the other one is and not gate.
This is perfectly okay in chip diagram.
And we see that the b signal undergoes
the same the same treatment.
And in general, when you write HDL code,
you are allowed to take any signal.
And distribute as many copies
as you want of this signal
into as many destinations as you want.
This this wiring or
these dispatching is done simultaneously.
So to use formal language
HDL has unlimited thin out.
You can, you can thin out any given signal
to as many destinations as you want.
And we do it we always do
it when we write HDL code.
All right.
Moving along, notice that we're using
some off the shelf gates and not and or.
Now whenever you use an off,
off the shelf gate,
you are bound to use the names
of the gate's input and
output as advertised, so to speak.
In other words, when you take the gate,
gate off the shelf, the gate comes
along with what can be called
the gate's signature or the gate's API.
So we have no degrees of freedom here.
We have to use the official
names of the the inputs and
outputs of,
of every one of our chip parts.
Now the next thing that we
do is let's focus on the red
connections that we see here.
These are the connections that we draw
in order to connect the different
chip parts together.
Now the rule is that every one of
these connections has to be named and
it's our responsibility to come up with
sensible names, so that's what we do.
We can call this particular
connection not a,
which is a sensible name,
I think a self-descriptive name.
We'll do the same thing with the not b.
We call this one a and not b.
We can call this one not b not a and
b and, and that's it.
We, we, we have named all the internal
connections in our architecture.
And we can actually now move on
to describe this diagram in HDL.
So now we can actually move on and
implement this diagram using HDL.
So we return to the HDL stub
file that we had before.
And I use the term stub file to
describe a partial HDL implementation,
so to speak that actually describes
only the chip's interface.
And typically, it comes with
the statement implementation missing or
put your code here and so on and so forth.
So this is the contract that
we actually have to implement.
And now, indeed, we are going to focus on
the implementation section of this file.
And basically,
what we do is we begin to describe
the gate diagram one chip part at a time.
And for each one of the chip parts
that we have, we write a single
HDL statement that describes the chip
along with all its connections.
So we have two we happen
to have two not chip parts.
So we describe them.
The first not has n equals a.
This is the input.
You know, the, the n input of
the chip receives the a signal.
And the out,
output of of the chip goes into not a.
We do similar with the,
with the other not chip.
Then we described the two and chips.
And finally,
we described the other or chip.
Notice by the way that they
use the words gate and
chip interchangeably and
that's perfectly okay.
A gate for me is simply a simple chip.
All right.
So this HDL diagram is nothing more than
a textural description
of the gate diagram.
Did I say, HDL diagram, I, I meant the HDL
file is a textural description of,
of the gate diagram that we
see at the top of the slide.
Now, I'd like to to notice that
once again, we have interface,
we have implementation.
And also note that the interface
of the chip is unique, you know?
There's only one way to describe this
chip and this is typically given to
us by whoever, you know,
commissioned us to implement this chip.
At the same time,
the implementation is not unique and
the same interface can be implemented in
typically in many, many different ways.
For example, in the case of Xor,
we can implement the Xor chip
using three logic gates only.
So and it doesn't really
matter how exactly we do it.
We can, you can think about
it on your own if you want.
But in general,
there may be different implementations and
some of them will be less expensive.
They will contain less chip box,
less connections.
Consume less energy and
so on and so forth.
So the interface is unique and
implementation varies.
Now, I'd like to use this opportunity to
make some general observations about,
about HDL.
And for ease of reference I
have placed in front of you
what we saw earlier in this unit.
The the gate diagram on the right-hand,
hand side and
its HDL description on the left.
So what, what can we say about, about HDL?
First of all, we see that there
are certain issues in HDL,
which are very similar to what we normally
do in other programming languages.
We have to worry about good
documentation of our HDL program,
just like we do when we write
the program in Java or Python.
We have to come up with
good descriptive names.
Both to the chips that we use and
to the connections that
we that we create within the architecture.
So readability is terribly important.
You know, we have to make sure that our
HDL code is self-descriptive and readable.
And in order to do it,
we also use indentation.
You know and and
make the code look real nice.
So, all of these things are expected from
you when you write your own HDL programs.
In addition, there are certain things
which are really unique to HDL.
First of all, HDL is a functional or
declarative language.
There is no procedure going on.
There's no program execution going on.
It is nothing more than a static
description of the gate diagram.
At the same time, you know,
we assume that at some point this
descriptive code will go
into some interpreter.
You know, it will go into,
in our case into harder simulator that,
that can actually take
this description and
start to sort of pipe values from
the bottom all the way to the end.
So we assume there is some
agent that will turn this
implementation into something that,
that is actually working.
But this procedural part is
not part of the HDL code,
you know, it's external to the HDL code.
So because HDL is a functional language,
we can actually write those HDL
statements in any order that we wish.
You know, it doesn't matter if you begin
to describe the not gate or the or gate,
it's completely up to you.
But it is typically it's
customary to begin to describe
your diagram from left to right and
this also makes the code more readable.
Also, note that each time we use
an off the shelf gate, we commit
ourself to using the gate interface,
that is the names of the input and
outputs that come along with
the gate documentation.
Now, in the HEC computer that we're
going to build in this course.
We decided as a matter of convention
to almost always use the letters and
b for a two input chip and
out for a single output chip.
And therefore, we are going to have
many chip connections that look
like a equals a and out equals out.
Now, at the beginning, you know,
this formalism these conventions
will look a little bit strange.
You know, what does it mean,
a equals a, out equals out?
If you think about it a little bit and
if you go back to consult these diagrams,
you will see that these
connections make a lot of sense.
And actually, they are very convenient
from a programming perspective.
You will realize that once
you get your hands dirty and
write some HDL code of your own.
So, I'd like to end with
some some comments about
hardware description languages in general.
There are many of them out there and
yet, the two most popular
HDLs that at least I know of
are VHDL are Veri, Verilog.
These are the languages which are used,
I think in 90% of
hardware design projects.
But there are many other HDLs that
are out there that can be used, as well.
Our own HDL is very similar in
its spirit to the industrial
strength HDLs that I mentioned earlier,
VHDL and Verilog.
And yet, it is a very minimal and
simple version of these HDLs.
And for this reason, you can master
it in something like one hour of
reading a tutorial and and beginning
to write some HDL code of of your own.
And most importantly, our HDL along
with our hardware simulator gives you
everything that you need in order to build
the computer described in this course.
And actually, any other computer
that you may want to build
using the knowledge that you will
gain in the Nand2Tetris course.
So if you want read more about HDL and,
and you should,.
Take a look at a Appendix A in
the textbook and also read
the HDL Survival Guide in
our Nand2Tetris website.
Both are, are actually available in,
in the website.
And you may want to also take
the hardware simulator tutorial and,
and learn how to actually read
HDL descriptions and, and
execute the underlying logic
of these HDL using simulation.
So this has been the unit in which
we gave you a primer of HDL.
And in the next unit,
we'll describe, once again,
how you can take your HDL designs and
bring them to life within the context
of the hardware simulator.